Add LIP: "State model and state root" (#88)
LiskHQ/lips: proposals/lip-state-model.md

```
LIP: <LIP number>
Title: State model and state root
Author: Alessandro Ricottone <alessandro.ricottone@lightcurve.io>
Type: Informational
Created: <YYYY-MM-DD>
Updated: <YYYY-MM-DD>

> Required: Introduce sparse Merkle trees LIP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Required: 0039
```

```

## Abstract

> The state of an interoperable chain in the Lisk ecosystem is organized as a sparse Merkle tree, the state tree, built on top of a generic key-value storage for each module of the chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state of an interoperable chain in the Lisk ecosystem is organized as a sparse Merkle tree, the state tree, built on top of a generic key-value map for each module of the chain.
```

This allows to authenticate the whole state with the tree Merkle root, the state root.
In this LIP, we define the state model of a Lisk blockchain and the construction of the state tree from which the state root is calculated.

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

> A blockchain created with the  Lisk SDK is organized in a modular way: each module registered in the chain defines its own state and the possible state transitions, i.e., the transactions defined within the module or the handlers that can be called by other modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A blockchain created with the  Lisk SDK is organized in a modular way: each module registered in the chain defines its own state and the possible state transitions, i.e., the transactions defined within the module or the reducers that can be called by other modules.
```

This is reflected by the state tree: each module maintains its own key-value storage and sparse Merkle tree, which are finally merged together to form the complete state tree.
This LIP specifies the general format for the key-value storages and the way in which they are combined together in the state tree. 

Organizing the state of a blockchain as a Merkle tree allows to cryptographically authenticate the whole state with a single hash, the state root.
The state root property is calculated at the end of the block processing and included in the block header.

> When a certificate is posted to a chain, the state root is used to authenticate the information contained in it against the block header, which has been signed by the sending chain validators.

Reviewer 2: Actually, the certificate and not the block header is signed by the validators.

Author: edited substantially

This is done using a "witness", i.e. an array of hashes used to recompute the root starting from the known elements of the tree. 

In the future, the state root could further facilitate the introduction of light clients.
Light clients would only check the validity of block headers, without fully verifying every transaction in a block.
The state root can then be used to verify the correctness of a portion of the state, such as a user balance, requested by the light client to a full node. 

Furthermore, the state root could be used for faster synchronization: a node could download a snapshot of the blockchain at a block close to the tip, therefore synchronizing quickly to the last state, while in the background it downloads and verifies blocks in the past. 
In this case, the state root would be used to verify the validity of the snapshot.

Finally, the state root can be employed to improve the [regenesis protocol](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/master/proposals/lip-0035.md). 
A node could download the state root from a trusted party and then check that the genesis block of a chain defines a state that corresponds to the trusted state root.

## Rationale

> Each module registered in a chain maintains a separate key-value storage. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each module registered in a chain maintains a separate key-value map. 
```

Reviewer 2: I think there will be one storage interface for all modules so the storage itself is not separated.

Author: edited

Author: I added an extra sentence to explain that the key-value maps are combined in a single global storage (otherwise the terms storage prefix and storage key seemed a bit odd)

Reviewer 2: Makes sense.

> In this LIP, we specify how the entries of the key-value storage are inserted in a sparse Merkle tree (introduced in [LIP "Introduce sparse Merkle trees"][LIP-SMT]), the state tree. 

Reviewer: this one and the other 2 links to the LIP 0039 in this doc can be now updated to the preferred format to reference LIPs: "LIP 0039"

Author: done

The state root is then set to the root of the state tree. 
The key-value entries of the persistent storage are specified in the respective modules. 
There is no a-priori separation between user and chain accounts, as they are treated as any generic key-value entry. 
Each entry specifies a storage prefix and a storage key. 
The storage prefix identifies different ''buckets'' within the module storage, i.e. group of entries with different scope. 
The storage key identifies different entries within a bucket.

> Keys of the state tree leaf nodes are obtained by concatenating the module ID, the storage prefix and the hash of the storage key. 

Reviewer 2: "state tree leaf nodes" sounds odd. You mean "leaf nodes of the state tree"?

Author: yes, edited

Prepending the module ID allows to separate the state tree in smaller subtrees (one per module), each managed by the respective module, which is also responsible for creating witnesses relative to properties stored in their database (see Figure 1). 

> Similarly, the storage prefix separates the different buckets within the same database into different subtrees. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, the storage prefix ensures that a group of key-value entries within one bucket are in the same subtree. 
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think it makes sense to use the term database here and below.

Storage keys are hashed in order to randomize them. 

> This effectively mitigates spam attacks that aim at creating many database entries (e.g., accounts) in a certain key neighborhood (e.g., close to the target account address), in order to increase the length of inclusion proofs for that key (in [our SMT implementation][LIP-SMT]).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This effectively mitigates spam attacks that aim at creating many key-value entries (e.g., accounts) in a certain key neighborhood (e.g., close to the target account address), in order to increase the length of inclusion proofs for that key (in [our SMT implementation][LIP-SMT]).  
```

Given B buckets in a module store and N entries in the bucket, the module subtree will contain on average Log(B) + Log(N) layers. 
The expected number of operations needed to validate a witness from a leaf to the state root is 32 (for the 4 bytes of the module ID), plus 16 (for the 2 bytes of the storage prefix), plus Log(N) for the module subtree. 
Empty hashes are not included in the witness, and the resulting witness size is therefore Log(M) + Log(B) + Log(N), where M indicates the number of modules registered in the chain.

## Specification

<img src="lip-state-model/tree.png" width="90%" align="center">

_Figure 1: The general structure of the state sparse Merkle tree for a Lisk blockchain defining two custom modules. 
The state root is the Merkle root. 

> Each module defines a different generic key-value store. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each module defines its own key-value map. 
```

The keys of the leaf nodes start with the module IDs, so that each module subtree is separated from the others.
Not all modules are depicted in this example._

The state root is the root of a sparse Merkle tree (specified in [LIP 0039][LIP-SMT]), the state tree. 

> Each registered module of the chain defines a generic key-value storage. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each registered module of the chain defines its own key-value map. 
```

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

A blockchain created with the Lisk SDK is organized in a modular way: each module registered in the chain defines its own state and the possible state transitions, i.e., the transactions defined within the module or the reducers that can be called by other modules.
This is reflected by the state tree: each module maintains its own key-value map and sparse Merkle tree, which are finally merged together to form the complete state tree.
This LIP specifies the general format for the key-value maps and the way in which they are combined together in the state tree. 

Organizing the state of a blockchain as a Merkle tree allows to cryptographically authenticate the whole state with a single hash, the state root.
The state root property is calculated at the end of the block processing and included in the block header. 
Information from the block header is then used to create a certificate and signed by the chain validators.
When a certificate is posted to a chain, the state root is used to authenticate the information contained in it.

> For example, a node can verify that the cross-chain messages in the certificate payload have been included in the outbox of the sending chain by recomputing the state root signed in the certificate from the outbox root.

Reviewer 2: The cross-chain messages are contained in the CCU transaction, not in the certificate payload. Also, the state root contained a certificate rather authenticates other information in the CCU, not other information in the certificate (previous sentence).

Author: rephrased

Author: edited

Similarly, the storage prefix ensures that a group of key-value entries within one bucket are in the same subtree. 
Storage keys are hashed in order to randomize them. 
This effectively mitigates spam attacks that aim at creating many key-value entries (e.g., accounts) in a certain key neighborhood (e.g., close to the target account address), in order to increase the length of inclusion proofs for that key (in [our SMT implementation][LIP-SMT]).

Given B buckets in a module store and N entries in the bucket, the module subtree will contain on average Log(B) + Log(N) layers. 
The expected number of operations needed to validate a witness from a leaf to the state root is 32 (for the 4 bytes of the module ID), plus 16 (for the 2 bytes of the storage prefix), plus Log(N) for the module subtree. 
Empty hashes are not included in the witness, and the resulting witness size is therefore Log(M) + Log(B) + Log(N), where M indicates the number of modules registered in the chain.

## Specification

<img src="lip-state-model/tree.png" width="90%" align="center">

> _Figure 1: The general structure of the state sparse Merkle tree for a Lisk blockchain defining two custom modules. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Figure 1: The general structure of the state sparse Merkle tree for a Lisk blockchain using two application-specific modules. 
```
